---
layout: paper
title: "Association Between HIV Infection and Mitochondrial DNA Copy Number in Peripheral Blood: A Population-Based, Prospective Cohort Study."
image: /assets/images/Default_paper.png
authors: Jing Sun, Ryan J Longchamps, Damani A Piggott, Christina A Castellani, Jason A Sumpter, Todd T Brown, Shruti H Mehta, Dan E Arking, Gregory D Kirk
ref: Sun et al. 2019. J Infect Dis.
journal: "The Journal of infectious diseases <b>219</b>, 1285-1293 (2019)"
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy658
abbrev: "J Infect Dis <b>219</b>, 1285-1293 (2019)"
pub_year: 2019
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="30476184" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

Low mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number (CN) is a predictor of adverse aging outcomes, and its status may be altered in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected persons. This study evaluated the cross-sectional and longitudinal change of mtDNA CN by HIV markers.

mtDNA CN was measured in the ALIVE (AIDS Linked to the Intravenous Experience) cohort of persons with a history of injecting drugs. Multivariable linear regression models controlling for demographic characteristics, behavior, and hepatitis C virus (HCV) seropositivity assessed the relationship of mtDNA CN to HIV markers (CD4+ T-cell counts, viral load, antiretroviral therapy [ART] use). Linear mixed models tested the association between HIV markers and age-related mtDNA CN trajectories.

Among 741 individuals at baseline, 436 (59%) were infected with HIV. HIV-infected individuals who had lower CD4+ T-cell counts (P = .01), had higher viral loads (P < .01), and were not receiving ART (P < .01) had significantly lower mtDNA CNs than uninfected persons; there was no difference between participants who were uninfected and HIV-infected individuals who had well-controlled HIV levels. In longitudinal follow-up of 507 participants, from age 50 years onward, mtDNA CN declined significantly faster among HIV-infected individuals than among HIV-uninfected persons (-0.03 units of change/year vs 0.006 units of change/year; P = .04), even among infected individuals with well-controlled HIV.

Before 50 years of age, mtDNA CN is similar between HIV-infected individuals with well-controlled HIV and uninfected persons, but from age 50 onward, mtDNA CN declines significantly faster among all infected individuals than among HIV-uninfected persons.

