---
layout: paper
title: "The EBV Gastric Cancer Resource (EBV-GCR): A Suite of Tools for Investigating EBV-Associated Human Gastric Carcinogenesis."
image: /assets/images/papers/37112833.png
authors: Mikhail Y Salnikov, Eric Wang, Erik Christensen, Martin A Prusinkiewicz, Parisa Shooshtari, Joe S Mymryk
ref: Salnikov et al. 2023. Viruses.
journal: "Viruses <b>15</b>,  (2023)"
doi: 10.3390/v15040853
abbrev: "Viruses <b>15</b>,  (2023)"
pub_year: 2023
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="37112833" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) causes lifelong infection in over 90% of the world's population. EBV infection leads to several types of B cell and epithelial cancers due to the viral reprogramming of host-cell growth and gene expression. EBV is associated with 10% of stomach/gastric adenocarcinomas (EBVaGCs), which have distinct molecular, pathological, and immunological characteristics compared to EBV-negative gastric adenocarcinomas (EBVnGCs). Publicly available datasets, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), contain comprehensive transcriptomic, genomic, and epigenomic data for thousands of primary human cancer samples, including EBVaGCs. Additionally, single-cell RNA-sequencing data are becoming available for EBVaGCs. These resources provide a unique opportunity to explore the role of EBV in human carcinogenesis, as well as differences between EBVaGCs and their EBVnGC counterparts. We have constructed a suite of web-based tools called the EBV Gastric Cancer Resource (EBV-GCR), which utilizes TCGA and single-cell RNA-seq data and can be used for research related to EBVaGCs. These web-based tools allow investigators to gain in-depth biological and clinical insights by exploring the effects of EBV on cellular gene expression, associations with patient outcomes, immune landscape features, and differential gene methylation, featuring both whole-tissue and single-cell analyses.

